.. _data_preprocessing:

Data preprocessing
==================================
This section involves processing single cell gene expression matrix and meta_data to train and test data. The preprocessing procedure typically consists of several stages.

* Data normalization and filtering.

* Build network structure using GO annotations.

* Build network structure using TF-gene relationships.

* Dataset creation.




Data normalization and filtering
********************

The scGO takes as input a single cell gene expression matrix and meta_data. The gene expression matrix is a matrix of size (n_cells, n_genes), where n_genes is the number of genes and n_cells is the number of cells.  The following is a gene expression matrix example.

.. csv-table:: Gene expression matrix
   :header: "", "A1BG", "A1CF", "A2M", "A2ML1", "A4GALT", "A4GNT", "AA06", "AAAS", "AACS", "AACSP1", "...", "ZWILCH", "ZWINT", "ZXDA", "ZXDB", "ZXDC", "ZYG11B", "ZYX", "ZZEF1", "ZZZ3"
   :widths: 30,5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5

   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0001", 0, 4, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, "...", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0002", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, "...", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 4, 0, 1
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0003", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, "...", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0004", 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, "...", 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 1, 0

The mata_data is a matrix of size (n_cells, n_meta_data), where n_meta_data is the number of meta_data. The meta_data should have a column named ``cell_type``. The following is a meta_data matrix example.

.. csv-table:: Meta data
   :header: "", "donor", "cell_type"
   :widths: 30, 30, 30

   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0001", "GSM2230757", "Acinar cells"
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0002", "GSM2230757", "Acinar cells"
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0003", "GSM2230757", "Acinar cells"
   "human1_lib1.final_cell_0004", "GSM2230757", "Acinar cells"

Normalization is a crucial step in the analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data. scGO employs total counts normalization, wherein each cell's gene expression values are normalized by dividing them by the counts per ten thousand (CP10K) of that cell. Other normalization methods are also effective in conjunction with scGO. If the gene expression matrix is already normalized, the normalization step can be skipped. Following that, scGO retains the top genes expressed in the majority of cells, with a recommended range of 2000-6000 genes for input. This process was implemented in the ``norm_and_filter`` command from the data processing script. The following is an example of the usage::

    python data_processing.py norm_and_filter --gene_expression_matrix ../demo/baron_data.tsv --num_genes 2000 --output ../demo/baron_data_filtered.tsv


Biological knowledge utilization
********************


Guppy is used for basecalling in TandemMod. Guppy, as well as the now deprecated Albacore and all other basecallers, uses files in fast5 format as input. In addition to basecalling, Guppy also performs filtering of low quality reads, clipping of Oxford Nanopore adapters. More detailed documentation about Guppy can be found on the official `Nanopore Technology repository <https://github.com/nanoporetech/pyguppyclient>`_. This step can be time-consuming and may require several hours or even days to complete, depending on the computational capacity available::

    guppy_basecaller -i demo/fast5 -s demo/guppy --num_callers 40 --recursive --fast5_out --config rna_r9.4.1_70bps_hac.cfg

Arguments

=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
Argument name                       Required    Default              Description
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
-i=DIR                              Yes         NA                    Input directory, containing FAST5 files generated by the nanopore sequencing platform
-s=DIR                              Yes         NA                    Output directory, containing FAST5 file as well as basecalled sequences.
--num_callers=NUM                   No          1                     Number of processes to run.
--fast5_out                         Yes         None                  Output FAST5 files to the directory.
--config=STR                        Yes         None                  The configure file is "rna_r9.4.1_70bps_hac.cfg" in TandemMod and should be adjusted according to DRS platform.
--recursive                         Yes         None                  This Argument allows recursive processing or batch processing of files
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================

Multi-fast5 to single-fast5
********************
If fast5 reads are stored at multi-reads format, ont_fast5_api is recommended to convert multi-fast5 reads to single-fast5 reads. Usually, the size of multi-reads fast5 file is about 200-300M. Convert multi-reads files to single-read files::

    multi_to_single_fast5 -i demo/guppy -s demo/guppy_single -t 40 --recursive 

Arguments

=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
Argument name                       Required    Default              Description
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
-i=DIR                              Yes         NA                    Input directory, containing multi-reads FAST5 files.
-s=DIR                              Yes         NA                    Output directory, containing single-read FAST5 files.
-t=NUM                              No          1                     Number of processes to run.
--recursive                         Yes         NA                    This Argument allows recursive processing or batch processing of files.
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================

Resquiggling
********************
The resquiggling algorithm is the basis for the Tombo framework. It takes as input a read file (in FAST5 format) containing raw signal and associated base calls. The base calls are mapped to a genome or transcriptome reference and then the raw signal is assigned to the reference sequence based on an expected current level model. Tombo is used for resquiggling in TandemMod::

    tombo resquiggle --overwrite --basecall-group Basecall_1D_001 demo/guppy_single  demo/reference_transcripts.fasta --processes 40 --fit-global-scale --include-event-stdev

Arguments

=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
Argument name                       Required    Default              Description
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
--overwrite                         Yes         NA                    Overwrite previous corrected group in FAST5 files.
--basecall-group                    No          Basecall_1D_000       FAST5 group obtain original basecalls. 
--processes                         No          1                     Number of processes to run.
--fit-global-scale                  No          NA                    Apply a scaling factor.
--include-event-stdev               No          NA                    Include the standard deviation.
args[0]                             Yes         NA                    Fast5 basedir. 
args[1]                             Yes         NA                    Reference transcripts, in fasta format.
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================

Feature extraction
********************
minimap2 is used to map basecalled sequences to reference transcripts:: 
    
    cat demo/guppy/pass/*.fastq >demo/m6A.fastq
    minimap2 -ax map-ont demo/reference_transcripts.fasta demo/m6A.fastq >demo/m6A.sam

Extract signal files from FAST5 files::
    
    python scripts/extract_signal_from_fast5.py -p 40 --fast5 demo/guppy_single --reference demo/reference_transcripts.fasta --sam demo/m6A.sam --output demo/m6A.signal.tsv --clip 10

Arguments

=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
Argument name                       Required    Default              Description
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
--fast5                             Yes         NA                    Fast5 basedir.
--reference                         Yes         NA                    Reference transcripts, in fasta format.
-p                                  No          1                     Number of processes to run.
--sam                               Yes         NA                    Aligment results, output from minimap2.
--output                            Yes         NA                    Output file contraining current signals.
--clip                              Yes         NA                    Base clip at both ends.
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================

Extract features from signal files::

    python scripts/extract_feature_from_signal.py  --signal_file demo/m6A.signal.tsv --clip 10 --output demo/m6A.feature.tsv --motif DRACH

Arguments

=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
Argument name                       Required    Default              Description
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================
--signal_file                       Yes         NA                    File contraining current signals.
--reference                         Yes         NA                    Reference transcripts, in fasta format.
--output                            Yes         NA                    Output file contraining features.
--clip                              Yes         NA                    Base clip at both ends.
=================================   ==========  ===================  ============================================================================================================